Describe EndDevice fields stored by IS/NS/AS/JS (#1741)
TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack: doc/content/reference/api/end_device.md

weight: 7
---

> End devices are registered in multiple registries. The Identity Server has a registry with end device metadata, the Network Server's registry contains the MAC configuration and MAC state (including network session keys), the Application Server keeps payload formatters and application session keys, the Join Server keeps the root keys.

Reviewer: Network session keys are not part of MAC state, so I think it's better to do the same as with AS:
```suggestion
End devices are registered in multiple registries. The Identity Server has a registry with end device metadata, the Network Server's registry contains the MAC configuration, MAC state, and network session keys, the Application Server keeps payload formatters and application session keys, the Join Server keeps the root keys.
```

When registering end devices, we recommend registering them in the following order:

- `EndDeviceRegistry.Create` (Identity Server)
- `JsEndDeviceRegistry.Set` (Join Server, only for OTAA devices)
- `NsEndDeviceRegistry.Set` (Network Server)
- `AsEndDeviceRegistry.Set` (Application Server)

When deleting end devices, we recommend deleting them in the reverse order

## The `EndDeviceRegistry` service

> The Identity Server's `EndDeviceRegistry` is the first place to register an end device. This registry stores the following [EndDevice fields](#message:EndDevice):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Identity Server's `EndDeviceRegistry` is the first service, where end device is registered. This registry stores the following [EndDevice fields](#message:EndDevice):
```

- `ids` (with subfields)
- `name`
- `description`
- `attributes`
- `version_ids` (with subfields)
- `network_server_address`
- `application_server_address`
- `join_server_address` (only for OTAA devices)
- `service_profile_id`
- `locations`
- `picture`

{{< proto/method service="EndDeviceRegistry" method="Create" >}}

{{< proto/method service="EndDeviceRegistry" method="Get" >}}

{{< proto/method service="EndDeviceRegistry" method="List" >}}

{{< proto/method service="EndDeviceRegistry" method="Update" >}}

{{< proto/method service="EndDeviceRegistry" method="Delete" >}}

## The `JsEndDeviceRegistry` service

> OTAA devices are registered in the Join Server's `JsEndDeviceRegistry`. This registry stores the following [EndDevice fields](#message:EndDevice):

Reviewer: The OTAA part is (and should be) already described above, maybe better to just be consistent with other components?
```suggestion
The Join Server's `JsEndDeviceRegistry` stores the following [EndDevice fields](#message:EndDevice):
```

Author: I don't want to assume that all readers read all information at the top before they skip to here.

> - `ids` (with subfields)

Reviewer: IDEM

- `provisioner_id` (when provisioning with secure elements)
- `provisioning_data` (when provisioning with secure elements)
- `resets_join_nonces`
- `root_keys`:
  - `root_key_id`
  - `app_key`
  - `nwk_key`
- `net_id`
- `network_server_address`
- `network_server_kek_label`
- `application_server_address`
- `application_server_id`
- `application_server_kek_label`
- `claim_authentication_code` (when using [end device claiming]({{< relref "end_device_claiming.md" >}}))

{{< proto/method service="JsEndDeviceRegistry" method="Set" >}}

{{< proto/method service="JsEndDeviceRegistry" method="Get" >}}

{{< proto/method service="JsEndDeviceRegistry" method="Delete" >}}

## The `NsEndDeviceRegistry` service

The Network Server's `NsEndDeviceRegistry` stores the following [EndDevice fields](#message:EndDevice):

> - `ids` (with subfields)

Reviewer: Is this list meant to be exhaustive or is it more of an example? If it's the former - this list is not complete, e.g. `last_dev_status_received_at` (and more)

Author: Clarified with comment below

- `frequency_plan_id`
- `lorawan_phy_version`
- `lorawan_version`
- `mac_settings` (with subfields)
- `mac_state` (with subfields)
- `supports_join`
- `multicast`
- `supports_class_b`
- `supports_class_c`
- `session.dev_addr`
- `session.keys`:
  - `session_key_id`
  - `f_nwk_s_int_key`
  - `s_nwk_s_int_key`
  - `nwk_s_enc_key`

{{< proto/method service="NsEndDeviceRegistry" method="Set" >}}

{{< proto/method service="NsEndDeviceRegistry" method="Get" >}}

{{< proto/method service="NsEndDeviceRegistry" method="Delete" >}}

## The `AsEndDeviceRegistry` service

> The Network Server's `NsEndDeviceRegistry` stores the following [EndDevice fields](#message:EndDevice):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Application Server's `AsEndDeviceRegistry` stores the following [EndDevice fields](#message:EndDevice):
```

weight: 7
---

> End devices are registered in multiple registries. The Identity Server has a registry with end device metadata, the Network Server's registry contains the MAC configuration, MAC state, and network session keys, the Application Server keeps payload formatters and application session keys, the Join Server keeps the root keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
End devices are registered in multiple registries. The Identity Server has a registry with end device metadata, the Network Server's registry contains the MAC configuration, MAC state and network session keys, the Application Server keeps payload formatters and application session keys, the Join Server keeps the root keys.
```

Author: Lol, I just committed your change suggestion 😝

- `network_server_address`
- `application_server_address`
- `join_server_address` (only for OTAA devices)
- `service_profile_id`
- `locations`
- `picture`

{{< proto/method service="EndDeviceRegistry" method="Create" >}}

{{< proto/method service="EndDeviceRegistry" method="Get" >}}

{{< proto/method service="EndDeviceRegistry" method="List" >}}

{{< proto/method service="EndDeviceRegistry" method="Update" >}}

{{< proto/method service="EndDeviceRegistry" method="Delete" >}}

## The `JsEndDeviceRegistry` service

OTAA devices are registered in the Join Server's `JsEndDeviceRegistry`. The following [EndDevice fields](#message:EndDevice) are registered in this registry:

- `ids` (with subfields)
- `provisioner_id` (when provisioning with secure elements)
- `provisioning_data` (when provisioning with secure elements)
- `resets_join_nonces`
- `root_keys`:
  - `root_key_id`
  - `app_key`
  - `nwk_key`
- `net_id`
- `network_server_address`
- `network_server_kek_label`
- `application_server_address`
- `application_server_id`
- `application_server_kek_label`
- `claim_authentication_code` (when using [end device claiming]({{< relref "end_device_claiming.md" >}}))

> See the [EndDevice message](#message:EndDevice) and its sub-messages for additional fields that can be read from the Application Server's `AsEndDeviceRegistry`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the [EndDevice message](#message:EndDevice) and its sub-messages for additional fields that can be read from the Join Server's `JsEndDeviceRegistry`.
```

Author: Copy pasta great success in this PR 🤦‍♂
